## Changes in the Family and the Elderly
*Am Shah*

Most research is centered around the middle class, and too simplistic and
repetitive.

Family vs Household - A family can be divided into multiple households. It is
not that they are disintegrating, they are simply divided in terms of house
holds. Therefore, to understand the situation of the elderly, we need to
consider whether they belong to a household or not.

Inter-household family relations are not as strong as household relations, and
as parents grow old, they face the consequences of this distinction. Hindu Law
states that the members of the joint family are entitled to receive maintenance
from the property. Financial support may thus be available to the elderly,
however this cannot remove the distress of isolation.

Before 1950s, the average joint household size was low because
  * Shorter life expectancy
  * Poverty and lack of property to serve as a proper economic base
  * Lack of Sanskritization in the lower classes, and therefore the masses
This increased post 1950s.

Households with one or more widowed members are often not considered withing the
definition of joint household.

Economic development of 1947 has increased the possibility of accumulating
household assets, providing an economic better base for development of joint
household.

The joint household life is declining within the westernised, professional,
middle class in urban centers. This is a brought on effect of urbanization.

AM Shah comments that the pretty picture presented to us of the past is really
not a clean picture, but only the nature of tensions within a household have
changed. The earlier case where parents could not visit the daughter's house
(in-laws' house) is now changing, not only on towns, but also in villages. This
has also been pushed through changes in Hindu Law.

Although, with the concept of nuclear families, the support from relatives,
close or distant, has reduced.

The increase in the marriage also renders tensions since the habits and
priorities of the daughter-in-law, being an adult, have already been formed.
However, there is now more accommodation and adjustment observed within both the
generations, however the major problems arise with adjusting with the
daughter-in-law.

## Healthy, Insecure, and Dependent Elders
*Tulika Tripathi*

India's public health policy is focused on reproductive and child heath, and
there is no attention paid to the impending pressure on the public health
systems.

Although the per capita income of India has increased, this has not really
affected the elderly, but only the new entrants of the society. The pension
schemes are offered to a very small proportion. Consequently, their economic
dependence rise with age.

Dependence of Elderly -
  * Economic dependence and lack of income security have strong implications on
  the health outcomes of the aged, with the women likely to suffer more.
  * Another kind of dependence is the lack of motor skills in the elderly, which
  further depends on their health outcomes. Women have more problems, due to
  their poor reproductive health.
  * Elders bear most of the disease burden, majorly affected by blindness and
  deafness
  * There is a lack of public policy concerning elders. Therefore, the resource
  poor and physically unfit lose the small healthcare to the richer and younger.
  Public policies have not considered the living conditions of these elders.

An important programme for the elders is the National Old Age Pension Scheme
(NOAPS), a centrally sponsored programme manages by the Ministry of Rural
Development. According to it, any elder above the age of 65 and below the
poverty line will get Rs. 300 per month, a meagre amount. Also the number of
elders that can fall under the scheme, at the moment, has a cap.

Most schemes are centered around reproductive and child heath, and the remaining
on diseases. The different disease pattern of the elderly is not considered. The
only place elders have is attributed to the cultural and traditional values of
the society.

## Social Assistance for Poor Elderly
*S Irudaya Rajan*

**National Social Assistance Scheme, 1995**

This scheme had three components -
  * National Old Age Pension Scheme
  * National Family Benefit Scheme
  * National Maternal Benefit Scheme

The National Old Age Pension Scheme applies under the following conditions
  * Age of the applicant must be more than 65
  * The application must be a destitute
  * The amount per month is Rs. 300
  * There is a ceiling on the number of people covered under the scheme

There were many who were not covered under the above scheme. Therefore another
scheme was introduced.

**Annapurana Scheme**

The elderly who were eligible for NOAPS would be covered under this scheme, and
would be provided with 10kg of rice or wheat per month.

Poverty alleviation schemes alone cannot help the status of the elderly, and
special attention must be given to social factors.

**Criticisms for the Scemes**

There is no uniformity in the amount of pension. The state adds to the amount,
with the lowest being 60, and the highest being 300. The standard fixed amount
from the center is 75.

Eligibility age also varies, with 55 in Rajasthan to 74 in Sikkim.
